README.md, before:

# TypeScript Express Template

A production-ready TypeScript Express.js boilerplate with ESLint, Prettier, and best practices.

## Features

- 🔧 **TypeScript** - Strongly typed JavaScript
- 🚀 **Express.js** - Fast, unopinionated web framework
- 📏 **ESLint** - Code quality enforcement
- 🎨 **Prettier** - Code formatting
- 🛡️ **Zod** - Environment validation
- 🔄 **Nodemon** - Automatic restarts during development
- ⚡ **TS-Node** - TypeScript execution runtime
- 🧪 **Strict TypeScript** - Enhanced type checking
- 📦 **Separation of Concerns** - App, server, and config separation
- 🛑 **Graceful Shutdown** - Proper process termination handling
- 🐛 **Global Error Handler** - Comprehensive error handling middleware
- 📋 **Custom Error Types** - Predefined HTTP exception classes
- 🔄 **Async Handler Wrapper** - Eliminates try/catch boilerplate in controllers

## Quick Start

1. **Create a new repository from this template** (click "Use this template" on GitHub)
2. **Clone your new repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone your-repo-url
   cd your-repo-name
   ```
3. **Run the setup script** (automatically renames project and installs dependencies):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh
   ```
   
   Or manually install dependencies:
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

4. **Start development server**:
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

## Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` - Run development server with hot reload
- `npm run build` - Compile TypeScript to JavaScript
- `npm start` - Run compiled production server
- `npm run lint` - Check for code quality issues
- `npm run lint:fix` - Automatically fix code quality issues
- `npm run format` - Format code with Prettier
- `npm run format:check` - Check code formatting
- `npm run type-check` - Run TypeScript type checking
- `npm run update:check` - Check for outdated dependencies
- `npm run update:deps` - Update dependencies to latest compatible versions
- `npm run update:latest` - Update dependencies to latest versions (may include breaking changes)

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── config/          # Configuration files
│   └── env.ts       # Environment validation
├── middlewares/     # Express middlewares
│   ├── asyncHandler.ts  # Async route handler wrapper
│   ├── errorHandler.ts  # Global error handling middleware
│   └── errorTypes.ts    # Custom error classes
├── app.ts           # Express application setup
├── server.ts        # Server startup and shutdown
└── index.ts         # Entry point
```

## Keeping Dependencies Updated

This template uses semantic versioning (^) for dependencies, so you'll get compatible updates automatically. The setup script automatically checks for outdated packages after installation. For manual checks:

1. **Check for outdated packages**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:check
   ```

2. **Update to latest compatible versions**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:deps
   ```

3. **Update to latest versions (including breaking changes)**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:latest
   ```

After updating, run tests to ensure everything works correctly.

## Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```env
NODE_ENV=development
PORT=3000
```

## Best Practices Implemented

1. **Separation of Concerns** - App configuration separated from server logic
2. **Graceful Shutdown** - Proper handling of process termination signals
3. **Global Error Handling** - Comprehensive error handling with custom error types
4. **Async Handler Wrapper** - Eliminates try/catch boilerplate in controllers
5. **Type Safety** - Strict TypeScript configuration
6. **Code Quality** - ESLint for code quality, Prettier for formatting
7. **Environment Validation** - Zod schema validation for environment variables
8. **Health Check** - `/health` endpoint for monitoring

## Global Error Handler

This template includes a global error handling middleware that:

- Catches all unhandled errors in the application
- Provides consistent error response format
- Includes timestamp, path, and status code in error responses
- Shows stack traces in development environment
- Logs errors to the console with detailed information
- Supports custom HTTP error types (400, 401, 403, 404, 500)

### Usage

Simply throw any of the custom error types in your routes or middleware:

```typescript
import { NotFoundException, BadRequestException } from './middlewares/errorTypes';

app.get('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const user = findUser(req.params.id);
  if (!user) {
    throw new NotFoundException('User not found');
  }
  res.json(user);
});

app.post('/users', (req, res) => {
  if (!req.body.name) {
    throw new BadRequestException('Name is required');
  }
  // Create user logic
});
```

The global error handler will automatically catch these errors and format them appropriately.

## Async Handler Wrapper

The async handler wrapper eliminates the need for try/catch blocks in async route handlers:

### Without asyncHandler (traditional approach):
```typescript
app.get('/users', async (req, res, next) => {
  try {
    const users = await getUsersFromDatabase();
    res.json(users);
  } catch (error) {
    next(error); // Pass error to global error handler
  }
});
```

### With asyncHandler (simplified approach):
```typescript
import { asyncHandler } from './middlewares/asyncHandler';

app.get('/users', asyncHandler(async (req, res) => {
  const users = await getUsersFromDatabase();
  res.json(users);
}));
```

Any errors thrown in the async handler will be automatically caught and passed to the global error handler.

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch
3. Commit your changes
4. Push to the branch
5. Open a pull request

## License

MIT

Commit message:

✨ feat: integrate mise for node version management
Adds a `.mise.toml` file to pin the project's Node.js version to the
latest LTS release. The README and setup script are updated to reflect
this new tool and guide users on its installation and usage.

This change introduces `mise` to enforce a consistent Node.js version across all development and deployment environments. This prevents "works on my machine" issues and simplifies the onboarding process for new developers by automating version selection.

README.md, after:

# TypeScript Express Template

A production-ready TypeScript Express.js boilerplate with ESLint, Prettier, and best practices. Uses [mise](https://github.com/jdx/mise) for managing the Node.js version.

## Features

- 🔧 **TypeScript** - Strongly typed JavaScript
- 🚀 **Express.js** - Fast, unopinionated web framework
- 📏 **ESLint** - Code quality enforcement
- 🎨 **Prettier** - Code formatting
- 🛡️ **Zod** - Environment validation
- 🔄 **Nodemon** - Automatic restarts during development
- ⚡ **TS-Node** - TypeScript execution runtime
- 🧪 **Strict TypeScript** - Enhanced type checking
- 📦 **Separation of Concerns** - App, server, and config separation
- 🛑 **Graceful Shutdown** - Proper process termination handling
- 🐛 **Global Error Handler** - Comprehensive error handling middleware
- 📋 **Custom Error Types** - Predefined HTTP exception classes
- 🔄 **Async Handler Wrapper** - Eliminates try/catch boilerplate in controllers

## Quick Start

1. **Create a new repository from this template** (click "Use this template" on GitHub)
2. **Clone your new repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone your-repo-url
   cd your-repo-name
   ```
3. **Install mise** (if not already installed):
   Follow the instructions at [https://github.com/jdx/mise](https://github.com/jdx/mise) to install mise.
   
   Then install the Node.js plugin:
   ```bash
   mise plugins install node
   ```
4. **Run the setup script** (automatically renames project and installs dependencies):
   ```bash
   ./setup.sh
   ```
   
   Or manually install dependencies:
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

5. **Start development server**:
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

## Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` - Run development server with hot reload
- `npm run build` - Compile TypeScript to JavaScript
- `npm start` - Run compiled production server
- `npm run lint` - Check for code quality issues
- `npm run lint:fix` - Automatically fix code quality issues
- `npm run format` - Format code with Prettier
- `npm run format:check` - Check code formatting
- `npm run type-check` - Run TypeScript type checking
- `npm run update:check` - Check for outdated dependencies
- `npm run update:deps` - Update dependencies to latest compatible versions
- `npm run update:latest` - Update dependencies to latest versions (may include breaking changes)

## Project Structure

```
src/
├── config/          # Configuration files
│   └── env.ts       # Environment validation
├── middlewares/     # Express middlewares
│   ├── asyncHandler.ts  # Async route handler wrapper
│   ├── errorHandler.ts  # Global error handling middleware
│   └── errorTypes.ts    # Custom error classes
├── app.ts           # Express application setup
├── server.ts        # Server startup and shutdown
└── index.ts         # Entry point
```

## Keeping Dependencies Updated

This template uses semantic versioning (^) for dependencies, so you'll get compatible updates automatically. The setup script automatically checks for outdated packages after installation. For manual checks:

1. **Check for outdated packages**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:check
   ```

2. **Update to latest compatible versions**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:deps
   ```

3. **Update to latest versions (including breaking changes)**:
   ```bash
   npm run update:latest
   ```

After updating, run tests to ensure everything works correctly.

## Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in the root directory:

```env
NODE_ENV=development
PORT=3000
```

## Using mise for Node.js Version Management

This template uses [mise](https://github.com/jdx/mise) to manage the Node.js version. The required Node.js version is specified in the `.mise.toml` file.

To use mise with this template:

1. Install mise by following the instructions at [https://github.com/jdx/mise](https://github.com/jdx/mise)
2. Install the Node.js plugin:
   ```bash
   mise plugins install node
   ```
3. When you enter the project directory, mise will automatically use the correct Node.js version specified in `.mise.toml`.

This ensures that all developers on the project are using the same Node.js version, eliminating potential issues related to version differences.

## Best Practices Implemented

1. **Separation of Concerns** - App configuration separated from server logic
2. **Graceful Shutdown** - Proper handling of process termination signals
3. **Global Error Handling** - Comprehensive error handling with custom error types
4. **Async Handler Wrapper** - Eliminates try/catch boilerplate in controllers
5. **Type Safety** - Strict TypeScript configuration
6. **Code Quality** - ESLint for code quality, Prettier for formatting
7. **Environment Validation** - Zod schema validation for environment variables
8. **Health Check** - `/health` endpoint for monitoring

## Global Error Handler

This template includes a global error handling middleware that:

- Catches all unhandled errors in the application
- Provides consistent error response format
- Includes timestamp, path, and status code in error responses
- Shows stack traces in development environment
- Logs errors to the console with detailed information
- Supports custom HTTP error types (400, 401, 403, 404, 500)

### Usage

Simply throw any of the custom error types in your routes or middleware:

```typescript
import { NotFoundException, BadRequestException } from './middlewares/errorTypes';

app.get('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const user = findUser(req.params.id);
  if (!user) {
    throw new NotFoundException('User not found');
  }
  res.json(user);
});

app.post('/users', (req, res) => {
  if (!req.body.name) {
    throw new BadRequestException('Name is required');
  }
  // Create user logic
});
```

The global error handler will automatically catch these errors and format them appropriately.

## Async Handler Wrapper

The async handler wrapper eliminates the need for try/catch blocks in async route handlers:

### Without asyncHandler (traditional approach):
```typescript
app.get('/users', async (req, res, next) => {
  try {
    const users = await getUsersFromDatabase();
    res.json(users);
  } catch (error) {
    next(error); // Pass error to global error handler
  }
});
```

### With asyncHandler (simplified approach):
```typescript
import { asyncHandler } from './middlewares/asyncHandler';

app.get('/users', asyncHandler(async (req, res) => {
  const users = await getUsersFromDatabase();
  res.json(users);
}));
```

Any errors thrown in the async handler will be automatically caught and passed to the global error handler.

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch
3. Commit your changes
4. Push to the branch
5. Open a pull request

## License

MIT
